---
layout: post.njk
tags:
  - agile
  - meetings
  - process
  - project management
  - standup
type: guide
title: The Standup Guide
description: Done correctly, standups can both move your project forward and be a daily opportunity for your team to connect and celebrate
date: 2023-12-30
---

## What is standup and why do we call it that?

Standup is an agile technique that was designed to get everyone aligned -
usually once a day. Some other common names for this include "daily", "sync",
and "scrum".

Most agile teams use one of two variations, "round robin" and "walk the board",
to get a glimpse into the current status of the project.

The reason the name "standup" has stuck is that many teams will literally stand
for the duration of the meeting as a way to encourage everyone to keep it
short - usually less than 15 minutes.

[preview](https://www.atlassian.com/team-playbook/plays/standups/)

## Why most folks don't love standup

Standup as it is commonly practiced has become rote, repetitive, and thanks to
modern project management tools... redundant.

Be honest, how easy is it for you to zone out while 5+ people say what they
worked on yesterday / today when it largely doesn't impact you? This is how most
people feel in standup - they are just waiting for their turn to speak and their
brain is in hibernate otherwise.

If you, as an individual contributor are expected to update a board with every
item you are working on doesn't it feel a little strange to essentially read a
diff of that board to your entire team?

Most standups do not yield 15 minutes worth of valuable insights and therefore
its quite hard to justify it existing.

Async standups are, often times, even worse. Now, rather than reading the board
out loud, you need to write down a summary of what changed. Many project
management tools have this built in and if not, its incredibly easy to automate
so why are we asking our teams to do this for us?

Walking the board can be more useful, but without a plan it is quite literally
like reading a slide deck to your audience. What value are you adding that they
could not have added on their own?

## How to make standup feel valuable to everyone

The most important question to answer is:

> What matters today and why?

If you can answer that clearly and succinctly in front of your team, that alone
justifies a message being sent out but perhaps not another meeting on the
calendar.

## How to tailor a standup to your team

For a complete guide, check out [The Standup Playbook](/playbook-standup).

[preview](https://cvburgess.com/lead-with-joy/posts/playbook-standup)

## Helpful resources from around the web
